feat(@astro/sitemap): custom sitemaps (#13682)
withastro/astro: .changeset/red-candles-invite.md

---
'@astrojs/sitemap': minor
---

> Add a `customSitemaps` option to include extra sitemaps in the `sitemap-index.xml` file generated by Astro. This is useful for multi-framework setups on the same domain, where for example Astro generates `example.com` and some other framework handles `example.com/blog` and you want to include `example.com/blog/sitemap.xml` to `sitemap-index.xml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adds a `customSitemaps` option to include extra sitemaps in the `sitemap-index.xml` file generated by Astro.

This is useful for multi-framework setups on the same domain as your Astro site (`example.com`), such as an external blog at `example.com/blog` whose sitemap is generated by another framework.

The following example shows configuring your Astro site to include externally-created sitemaps for a blog and help centre along with the generated sitemap entries in `sitemap-index.xml`:
```
Please feel free to adjust if the nuance is not quite right, but this is kind of the structure we'd typically use!

Author: Looks good overall, thanks! Minor comments:
- `...such as an external blog at`: I think it should be `externally generated` or something like that. Because effectively the blog is not external, it is under the same domain. It's just created with smth other than Astro.
- `centre`:  I think it's generally written as `help center`. Or is it the british writing style? Sorry, I'm not sure.

Reviewer: (Noting that I updated my suggestion above in response to Gourav's comments! I think this should be OK now!)

Reviewer: @gouravkhunger Would you please edit the text as you'd like to see it, then I can simply review and check if there are any language issues to worry about? I think that's the easiest way to proceed here! :smile:

Example:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import sitemap from '@astrojs/sitemap';

export default defineConfig({
  site: 'https://example.com',
  integrations: [
    sitemap({
      customSitemaps: ['https://example.com/blog/sitemap.xml', 'https://example.com/helpcenter/sitemap.xml'],
    }),
  ],
});

> ```

Reviewer: ``````suggestion
```

Learn more in the [`@astrojs/sitemap` configuration documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/sitemap/#configuration).
``````
Just adding some kind of link back to documentation! This could go directly to the entry itself (`/#customsitemaps`) or just pointing to config options is fine, I think!

Reviewer: Hi, just a note that if you would like to accept this change, you can use the "commit suggestion" button to update the content of the file! Right now, this sits as an unresolved issue until you either accept my suggestion, or ignore it and update the code yourself. :smile: 

Like in the comment above, you are welcome to simply make changes yourself and I can always check it over for language again!

---
'@astrojs/sitemap': minor
---

> Introduce option to add custom sitemaps to index

Reviewer 2: Can you please provide more description? You're about to explain a new feature to Astro users, so you'd want to put more description about the feature (preferably beginner-friendly). Also, you'd want to explain what a "custom sitemap" is

Author: This feature is very similar to the [`customPages`](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/sitemap/#custompages) option but in the sense that it let's users include other sitemaps that could be hosted on a site into the `sitemap-index.xml` file that astro generates.

- `customPages`: They are included with the pages a site has and go along with them into `sitemap-${i}.xml` file.
- `customSitemaps`: They will be included with all the `sitemap-${i}.xml` files and go into `sitemap-${index}.xml` file.

I used the word "custom" because `customPages` exists, otherwise I think "external" could make sense too.

I will update the changeset entry and add all this info, would be great if you could point if this info needs more clarity? Thank you!

Author: In the changeset I could describe this scenario as I did in the PR:

> Ability to add `customSitemaps` is important because in my case I host multiple services under the same domain proxied by nginx: `example.com` (made with astro), `example.com/blog` (made with ghost, etc.). So I need to be able to add `example.com/blog/sitemap.xml` to the default `sitemap-index.xml` file.

Reviewer 2: You want to explain how to use it (to me too, because I'm not familiar with `customPages`), use a case, and maybe a code snippet of the configuration that explains what's the end result.

Author: I've updated the changeset 🫡
